Oh the tape is rolling.
Not there yet.
Yup. Okay the tape is rolling so we're ready. So I'll reiterate, just how do you
go about editing a book? Okay well I'll tell you how I went about editing a
book. I had the idea, this was way back in the early 70s, of doing a book of
science fiction by women, about women. I didn't think there'd be much point in
doing science fiction by women and having it all be about men or something,
because, I mean, that wouldn't really focus the book, at least as far as I was
concerned, it wouldn't. But I wanted to do something like that. It occurred to
me that there were a lot of stories that could be used, and then I tried to sell
the book, and I couldn't sell it. I sent it around everywhere. I sent it from
the highest to the low. I mean, I sent it to schlocky publishers. I sent it to
good publishers. I sent it to publishers in between the two extremes, and I
would get letters back saying, this is a very nice idea. Somebody should do
this, but it isn't going to be us. Or this is very nice, but it has limited
appeal. You know, that was my favorite. I said, yes, it certainly does. It's
only a little more than 50% of the population. But I
was sending it around for about two years.
And finally, when I was about ready to give up, I got a letter from Vonda
McIntyre who had found out that someone at Vintage Books was interested in an
anthology of that kind. And in fact, I guess I asked her if she wanted to do
one. She had known that I was sending my book around and not having much luck
with it. So she told me about this, which was, you know, too certainly kind of
for her to do. And I submitted the book to them and they took it. After that, I
had to learn about editing because I had to start weeding things out. I had to
realize that I couldn't put every last thing in the book, that I had to have
some sort of structure to the story, some sort of way of setting them up in the
book so that they sort of followed one from the other, I decided finally just to
use the obvious method, which was to take the one that was published earliest
and put it at the beginning, and take the one that was published most recently
and put it at the end so you sort of see how things progress over time. And then
after that I had to write the introduction, and that was probably the hardest
part because I had to do quite a lot of research for that. But I think it helped
me, and I also think it probably aided the other two books, too, which I did
later. The other two Women of Wonder books, I had not thought of doing them when
I did the first, and the publisher was the one that proposed them to me. They
proposed the second one, first of all, and then asked me if I wanted to do a
third one also, thinking, I guess, that everything is supposed to come in threes
nowadays. And that was why I did the other two.
But I don't know if that would work for anyone else as far as if I were giving
advice to someone as to how to edit. But all I can say is if you have an idea
that's really striking and you really feel that there's a lack of that
particular kind of book, that it is something that would be valuable to readers
for many years, that presents certain stories that haven't been reprinted, or
that presents stories in a certain way that is self-informative. And if you're
really determined, I think it's worth it just to keep sending the thing around
and sending it around and waiting until somebody buys it, at which point you
will then learn about what editing a book is, I suppose. Since I didn't really
know what it was when I was sending the proposal around, I had to learn it as I
was doing the first book. How do you get people to submit stories once the idea
is there? Well, what I did with this book is I had an easier task, I think,
because I used stories that had already been published. But what I had to do is
I had to read about everything I could get my hands on, magazines, anthologies,
old paperback reprints, everything, I had to read about probably 50 times as
many stories as I actually wound up publishing for each book. And then once I
had the list of stories that I finally wanted to use, at that point I would
write to the authors. Of course, then you have the problem of what if somebody
can't give you the rights to reprint the story then? And that happened to me a
couple of times. There were a couple of stories I wanted to use and I could not
get permission for them. Not through any fault of the authors just because the
stories were tied up in some way.
And that made it necessary to do a little restructuring on a couple of the
books. But overall, I'm satisfied with the way they turned out. and there wasn't
a single story in any of them that I didn't like myself. I think that's
important. I think an editor has to pick stories that she likes for whatever
reason and put those in rather than worrying about what someone else is going to
like.
I think if you like the stories, someone else will too anyway. And the chances
are good if you try to get a variety of stories that you'll have something that
appeals to almost anyone.
So you aim for your taste, really, and if you want to be a commercial success,
you hope that your taste and those of the public at large jive. That's what I
keep doing in everything. I suppose that's probably naive in some ways, but I
think I'd rather be naive than cynical. So I just don't think there's any point
in worrying about what other people like. First of all, I think people like a
lot more things than many publishers are willing to admit or give them credit
for liking. I mean, publishers talk as if there's a great appetite for junk, and
that's what they might as well publish. And yet whenever I talk to anybody, I
hear things like, God, all this junk on the bookshelves, you know, or why are
they publishing all these trashy books or things like that? I hear that kind of
comment all the time. Not just about science fiction. I mean, about a lot of
things. I don't think science fiction is the worst offender in this regard. It
may be one of them, but it's not the worst. And I really don't think that there
is some appetite for junk. Everybody has, I suppose, their favorite little bit
of junk that they like, or their particular vice. But I don't think the appetite
is as great as publishers think. I think a lot of publishers operate their
companies as if they have contempt for the people who read the book. And I
especially think this is true, I'm afraid, among some of the science fiction
editors. and it's too bad because i don't think the appetite for junk is quite
as large as they think and i do think that that good books that can can hang on
and stay around for a while have a much better chance over the long run of doing
well for the publisher although the publishers don't seem to realize this i
don't think you can concoct books in other words i think you can sit there and
try to concoct something that people are going to buy, I think you have to be
sincere about it. Even if you write a lousy book, if you're sincere about
writing that lousy book, there are going to be a lot of readers who may respond
to that sincerity. And however flawed the book may be, there'll be an essential
thing in it that readers will like or respond to in some way, even if it's not a
critical success. But if you try to concoct something or deliberately set out to
engineer a book that's going to appeal to a lot of people, I just don't think it
works. I think readers can spot that sort of thing. They may read it, they may
buy it if there's nothing else on the stand, but I don't think that they'll
choose it if they have a choice.
Okay, I want to now kind of sum up your work. I found a sentence when I was
reading the afterward to Gene Wolfe's fifth head of Cerberus, which he wrote,
and I'll read it. It's a short quote, and to me it sums up what your work is all
about, and I want to see if you agree with me. Okay, the quote is, The quest for
certainty and our notion of human beings as separate selves seeking a power over
other separate selves must give way to a more integrated view of the universe
and our growing place in it. to me that sums up a lot of what your fiction is
about
well I'm trying to think of what to say to that yeah just give me a couple sure
see if there's anything illuminating I can say well it's just my guess too so it
may even be wrong no I think it's probably true I think it's probably true
I think, well, I
think there are a great many problems in the world, if not most of them, have
probably been caused by people wanting an absolute certainty or seeking an
absolute kind of power or seeing things in these divisive kinds of ways.
and without that sort of thing, I think it's obvious things would be better.
This is going to sound very platitudinous, I'm sure.
Nope, sometimes platitudes are right.
Okay, that's the formal interview. I wanted to ask you a couple of things from a
fan's point of view. I was looking at your letter last night where you had the
books that you were going to sell me. The four anthologies, I couldn't tell if
they were first editions or not. Do you know all the vintage paperbacks? Are
they first editions? No. Well, by now they wouldn't be. They've all been
reprinted. Okay, but the copies that you have. Yeah, now, well, with the Women
of Wonder, I don't think I have any first editions. Uh-huh, okay. I have a
couple floating around, but with the other books, I do have some firsts of
BioFutures, and I do have some firsts of the other two also. Okay, but Women of
Wonder not, okay. I may pick those up one of these days if you still have them
around. I do have copies. I do have copies of all of them. Okay. Or if you want
vintage, have them in print too, so you can always get them from them too. Okay.
I kind of tend to go for first editions if I can get them, so I may have some of
my friends look for them, see what I can do. You and George both seem to hold
Pat Labruto in high esteem. Would he be a good editor for us to talk to as far
as just getting an interview from an editor from his point of view? Is he
accessible? Yeah, he might be interesting. I'll tell you why. Well, first of
all, he worked at Ace before he worked at Doubleday. And what he would be
interesting for is... I'll keep going. ...is he could tell you about what it's
like to work at a paperback house. He could tell you about what it's like to
work at a hardcover house. I think he probably has almost too much work to do,
probably. At Doubleday, he said, certainly has plenty of work to do, although at
Ace I think he was much more overworked. But I think he might be interesting to
talk to. Okay, good. We don't want to bother him if he doesn't want to be
bothered, but we would like to get an editor's point of view and maybe some
advice and that sort of thing, too. Well, one thing that might be useful to ask
him also is that Doubleday is probably one of the few places where it's at least
somewhat possible for a first novelist to get a novel published? I mean, a first
novel, say. It's easier to get one published there than at some other places, I
think. So for, you know, that might be something to ask him about. What is the
chance for a first novel being published? Okay. One thing we're working on,
eventually we will probably take our interviews and try to foist them off on the
public, at which time we'll, of course, contact you. But we're also interested
in talking to editors for that reason. But we're interested in talking to them.
They're just another facet of the science fiction field that fans know very
little about. In fact, we know very little about. We'd like to find out a lot
more about them. They're always something that you—they're maligned in print,
and people trying to submit books, there are these evil ogres that are sitting
up there between them and fame, and we'd just like to get there for one of you
one of these days. Yeah, well, Paul would probably be a good one to ask since
his line is one of the larger ones, for one thing, and it's one of the more long
-standing ones. I mean, Doubleday has had a science fiction line for quite some
time now, so he might be interesting to talk to about that. But the best thing
to do is just ask him. If he is too busy, he'll tell you. Okay, good. I don't
think he'd be mad at being after. Okay. Okay, listen, it's been very nice
talking to you. Thank you for consenting, and we look forward to seeing what
else comes out. Okay, yeah, we can send you a copy of the interview, and what we
will do when we cut it up and make the programs, we will also, not we can, we
will send you copies of that program as well. We'll send her a copy of the
program as they're aired. Yeah, I asked the program. So what you will hear, the
program part will be what will be aired on the radio. So that will probably be,
what, two or three months whenever it goes on the schedule, yeah. But we'll have
them long before that. So one of these days, we'll get those to you. Okay. And I
sure appreciate it and look forward to seeing more good things from you. Okay.
Okay. Bye-bye now.